---
layout: article
title: "Stollen"
date: 2018-12-26
modified: 2018-12-26
tags: [ vegetarian, "1000-1200kcals" ]
excerpt: "A stollen is a rich fruit loaf, typical for the festive season. This recipe is based on a recipe for Dresdner Christmas stollen from an old cookbook."
calorielevel: "5"
calorierange: "1000-1200kcals"
preptime: "30 mins prep, 75 mins baking"
current: ""
current_image:  stollen_1600.jpg
current_anchor:  stollen
comments: false
toc: false
categories: recipes
subset: special
image:
  feature: stollen_1600.jpg
  teaser: stollen_400.jpg
  thumb: stollen_400.jpg
---

A _stollen_ is a rich fruit loaf, typical for the festive season. This recipe is based on a Dresdner Christmas stollen recipe from an old cookbook[^1]. I reduced the amounts of butter, raisins and candied peel by half compared to the original.

#### Ingredients

- 50 g raisins (I used a cereal topper mix)
- 100 g candied orange/lemon peel
- 300 g marzipan
- 7 g dried yeast
- 700 g white flour
- 0.25 l milk
- 150 g butter (I used a mixture of butter and vegetable oil)
- 3 tablespoons sugar
- 1/2 teaspoon salt
- 50 g butter to spread on top of the loaf after baking
- 2-3 tablespoons icing sugar

#### Preparation

The preparation is quite similar to making bread.

- Put the flour and salt in a bowl.
- Make a hollow in the middle and put in the yeast, 2 tablespoons sugar and some water.
- Cover with a teatowel and let the yeast do its work for 10 minutes or so.
- Mix the butter in with the milk (I heated it to a little above room temperature in the microwave).
- Add the mixture to the flour and knead into a smooth dough. You may need add a little bit water if it is too dry.
- Leave to rise, covered, for 30 minutes.
- Quickly knead in the raisins and candied peel.
- Flatten the dough, shape the marzipan into a roll and fold the dough over it.
- Leave to rise, covered, for another 30 minutes.
- Preheat the oven on 200&deg;C; bake for 15 minutes at 200&deg;C, then 1 hour at 180&deg;C.
- While it's still hot, spread butter on top and sprinkle on the icing sugar.

[^1]: A Dutch translation of a German cookbook, now long out of print: "De heerlijkste gerechten" by Annette Wolter, _Culinaire boekerij_, 1988.
